Now let's write a small menu-driven
database application to make use of what
we've learned.
First, I want to run it to give
you the idea of where we're going.
I'll open the command prompt,
python phones.py.
This is the menu.
I type show, it will show all
the records we have there.
So we have three names and
three phone numbers.
We can create a new name
With a new phone number.
I'm going to show you that it's there.
We can delete a name.
We're going to delete number three,
show you that it's gone.
We can edit a name.
I'm going to edit number three.
That's the lame [INAUDIBLE] and I'll press
return and leave that name unchanged.
But I'm going to enter a new phone number.
I'm going to show you that it's there.
And then I can quit,
what happens when we quit is that
it saves the changes that you've made.
That's the way we left it.
All of this is stored in a CSV file.
My files.
Name and phone number.
Now let's go over and
look and see how we do this.
First of all, we're going to write
a simplified version of this program.
We go to app python consult and
run that simplified version.
It doesn't really load the file it just
announces that it's loading the file.
If you quit,
it announces that it's saving the file and
doesn't actually change the file.
Run it again.
If I show, it just announces it's showing.
If I type new,
it just announces it's adding.
If I type delete,
it announces it's deleting.
And if I type edit,
it announces that it's editing.
And that's all that it does.
The reason is we can't
write all of these at once.
What we're going to do is we're
going to write this main portion that
displays the menu, and
here is the first version of our program.
Deleting the phone is just a function
that announces that it's deleting.
Edit, the same way.
Each one of these actions is just
a stub that announces what it does.
I've got a function for
displaying the menu.
We've got a function for going through
what we'll call the main loop and
the way you start the program is
we have a statement like this.
There are two underscores before and
after name, two underscores before and
after main.
If the name is main, then we're
going to start at the main_loop, and
the main loop is a function.
First of all it loads the phone list,
the last thing it does is saves
the phone list and next it runs a loop.
While true, do everything in this loop.
Well, true, is always true, so
this loop will run forever.
I'll show you how we
get out of that later.
First thing we do is we
get their menu choice.
Menu choice will print the menu and
retrieve what your choice is.
If your choice is none,
that is you didn't make a choice,
you'll just double back and
do the loop again.
Continue means continue at
the beginning of the loop.
If your choice is q, then we'll print
exiting and break out of the loop.
Which means we'll do this next statement
which will save the phone last and
then we quit.
If your choice is new,
we'll create a file.
If the choice is delete,
we'll delete a file.
If the choice is show phones,
we'll show '.
The choice is edit, we'll edit the file.
If there's anything else, we'll just
announce that as an invalid choice.
Now let's see how we get,
if we print the menu and make the choice.
We call this function, And,
first of all, it says print.
Choose one of the following options.
Then it prints all of the options.
So we see that here.
And then we use an input
statement to get that choice.
Again, we see there's
right along in there.
Now we changed the choice that
the person makes to lowercase so
we can compare it to these
letters in this table.
If it is in this table, then we'll
return that choice changed to lowercase.
So, that down here in our
main loop all of the choices
will be lower case when they get there.
So, I don't have to compare the q and
capital q.
If the choice is not in that, they will
print the choices of question mark.
That is an invalid option return none.
Let's try that and see what happens.
Choose one of the following options.
I'll choose t, that's an invalid option.
I'll choose 3, that's an invalid option.
But if I choose capital Q,
that works just fine.
Even though capital Q is not on this list,
capital Q gets change to
lowercase before we look.
That is the first
iteration of this program.
We're going to grow this program bigger.
Let's take a look at it.
We just have a bunch of stubs, And
we only have one main loop,
that function is written,
and a second function that
gathers the menu choices.
And we start this by having this
special statement at the end.
It tells Python where to
start executing the program,
it says starts executing at the main loop,
if this is the main program.
The first stub that we are going to
flash in, right before function form,
is show phones, the reason for
that is and if we did delete,
we would know whether
something was deleted.
If we did new we would know whether
something new was done, with show phones
we can see whether these other things
are working when we write them.
Let me run this one, just a moment and
show you what it does.
Nothing else really works.
Show.
Now the way we're doing this is,
I've going to ask something to show.
So I create a list of phones here.
There are two phones Jerry Seinfeld’s
number and Cosmo Kramer his number.
Each phone is a two element list
consisting of name and number.
The name position is zero
the phone position is one and
I’m going to use name position and
phone position as zero and
one to refer to this side so I don’t
get confused as to what I'm looking at.
Then has to be a header for
this name and phone number.
And so, I create a header as
though it were another phone.
Now, here's the show phones function.
First of all,
I'm going to show phone the header,
the first ones black, I’ll show you
what this black is about later.
Then I am going to step
through the phones.
For ever phone in phones,
I’m going to show phone and
I’m going to send this index,
so there numbered 1,2,3,4,5.
Start the index off at one,
after I show a phone I'm going to
bump the index up by one and
I'm going to pass to show phone not
only the phone itself but the index.
And I'm not going to show
the individual phone in this function,
I'm going to have another
function that will do that.
And then at the end I'm
going to skip a line so
that there's a little space
after the list of phones.
Here's how we show an individual phone.
We pass the phone which is remember
a list with two things in it,
the name and the phone number.
And we send the index.
We have a string.
The index is going to
occupy three spaces and
it's going to be right to just to fact.
The names is going to occupy 20 spaces and
it's going to be a left justify.
The phone number is going to occupy 16
spaces and it'll be right justified.
We're going to use that output string and
we're going to format it so
that index goes into
the zero element position.
Phone name goes into the one position and
phone number goes into the third position.
And there it is, index,
name, phone number.
That's all there is to it.
You've got show phones,
which is going to send the header,
it's going to step through the list of
phones, and send show phone, each phone.
And the show phones are going to
be formatted and printed.
Up here we did create these things and
that's to get us by right now.
Ultimately, we'll set the phones
list to the empty list.
Now let's replace some more of
these stubs with real functions.
Let's start by creating a new phone.
First, let me show you what
this version will run like.
They are the ones that we've built in, and
here's a new one,
enter the data for the new phone.
George Costanza.
2128351419.
Now we show, and there's George.
Now we can delete something too.
Well, which one do you want to delete?
We'll delete George.
Now he's gone.
That's what's new in this version.
First, let's start with
how you create a phone.
When you create a phone, it's going to
print into the data for a new phone.
There it is.
Then you gotta use an input
to get the new name.
You're going to input to
get a new phone number.
Then you're going to build the sub-list,
name and phone number, and
then you're going to pend it onto the
phones list and then you'll skip a line.
That's all there is to it.
Enter the name, enter the number,
build a phone sub-list,
pend it to the phones list.
Remember the phones list.
Here starts with Jerry Seinfeld and
Cosmo Kramer.
Now, let's look at delete.
That's a little bit more complex.
Now down in the main loop,
when you choose delete,
it's going to ask which item do you want
to delete and reprint which one it is for
the time being and
then we'll try to delete that one.
Here's the delete function.
First of all, we check to see
if there's a proper menu choice.
At the time we did this deletion,
there were only three people in there.
If I asked it to 17, it couldn't do it.
So we are going to check to see if
that's a legitimate menu choice.
Also if you typed in a letter or something
like that, we want to fill to that out.
So, we're going
to write a routine that'll check to
see if that is a proper menu choice.
And if it's not, we're just going to
return without deleting the phone.
If it is a proper menu choice,
I want to change to it an integer.
And then I'm going to delete one of them.
Now remember, we count these one,
two, three, four, five.
Those are the phone lines.
But, Python counts zero, one, two, three.
So, what we have to do is
reduce that by one and
then we delete that item
from the phone's list.
And then we'll print
that we've deleted it.
Now let’s take a look at this
proper_menu_choice business.
We pass this which onto that
proper_menu_choice option.
Now remember which came from
an input statement so it’s a string.
Now we going to have to
convert it to a number.
So first of all, we're going to need to
check to see if there’s digits in it.
If it has something in
it which is not a digit
then which.isdigit will return false.
So not is digit would be true,
and we have a print,
this which needs to be a number
of a phone, and return false.
If it returns false to delete phone,
then not false would be true and it
would return without deleting the phone.
So the first thing that happens is
we check to see if it's a number.
And if it is a number,
we'll convert it to an integer.
Now, there's another problem.
It could be a negative number.
We could have three phones and
it be the number 217.
We check to see whether this negative,
whether it's a bigger number
than there are phones.
If so, we'll print that it needs
to be the number of a home.
And then we'll return false so
that delete_phone will
not attempt to delete it.
Now if it passes this test, that it's
a number, it converts to a number and
it’s a number that’s within the proper
range, then we are going to consider it
an acceptable number to delete and
will return true.
So to summarize, delete_phones will
be passed which phone to delete.
It will check to see
if that’s a number and
if it’s a number within the proper range.
If it is it will convert
it to an integer and
it will delete that particular
phone from the phone list.